Accelerated Graphics Port (AGP) An expansion slot designed to meet the need for
increased graphics performance. Now outdated.
acceptable use policy Written policies and procedures identifying actions that are
appropriate on the system or network and the consequences for violating the policy.
access control A set of rules that determines access, such as which traffic gets through a
firewall and which traffic is blocked, who gets to access files or folders, or who can install
applications.
access control list (ACL) A set of rules that determines access, such as which traffic gets
through a firewall and which traffic is blocked or who gets to access files or folders.
accessibility Features built into most operating systems or web browsers to make it easier
to use for those who have physical disabilities by providing ease-­ of-­ use enhancements.
accounting The process of understanding what users did on a computer or network.
Generally accomplished with the use of log files.
activation Enabling a software application to function by entering in its product key.
add-­ on tionality. Often called an extension.
A piece of optional software added to a web browser to provide additional func-
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) Currently the most secure encryption available.
Advanced RISC Machines (ARM) reduced instruction set computing (RISC).
A type of processor that uses an architecture known as
adware Malware that records activities for the purpose of targeting pop-­ up ads.
AI assistants Automated response systems but can handle a broader range of topics or
questions, as well as perform tasks such as playing music or setting reminders and alarms.
AI chatbots Automated response systems designed to respond to specific questions or com-
ments on a given topic, generally used for customer service.
AI-­ generated code telling the AI what the code should do.
Programming code created by AI, based on prompts from a developer
AI-­ generated content describing what they want.
Text or images created by an AI, based on prompts from a user
Airplane mode A mode on a mobile device that disables wireless connections. In iOS, it dis-
ables the cellular connection; in Android, it disables the cellular and Bluetooth connections.
algorithm A process used for solving a problem or completing a task.
American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) Codes that represent
text and special characters on computers and telecommunications equipment. The standard
ASCII codes use 7 bits to store information.
Glossary 3
Android the world.
Mobile operating system created by Google; the most popular smartphone OS in
application A program on a computer.
archive bit File attribute that determines whether or not the file has changed since the last
backup. If the bit is on, that means the file has changed.
array In programming, a list of values; all of the elements in an array must be of the same
data type, and arrays are predefined in size and do not change.
artificial intelligence (AI) Technology that attempts to create computers or machines that
can mimic human thought patterns, problem-­ solving ability, and intelligence.
assembly language Low-­ level programming language used to access the hardware directly.
attenuation The weakening of a signal due to distance or obstructions.
attributes Properties or characteristics of an object or file.
augmented reality Technology that superimposes a computer-­ generated image or data on
a screen, over the current reality the user sees.
authentication credentials.
A process by which a computer system verifies that a user has the proper
authentication, authorization, and accounting (AAA) A framework for defining access
control that ensures the system knows who has logged on, what access that user has, and
what actions the user attempted or completed.
authorization user is allowed to take.
In the AAA access control model, authorization defines what actions the
autofill A feature that automatically populates fields in a form on a web page for you, such
as your name, address, or credit card information.
automatic update A process by which the operating system searches its manufacturer’s
website for software updates and downloads (and possibly installs) them automatically.
availability Resources are able to be accessed when the users need them.
B
backdoor A method used to log into a system by bypassing normal security methods.
backside bus (BSB) The optional communications pathway between the Northbridge and
the cache controller. When the backside bus is absent, the cache controller communicates
with the Northbridge over the front-side bus.
backup The process of making a copy of files and folders on a computer.
baseline A measure of the “normal” performance of your system or a component in the system.
4 Glossary
basic input/output system (BIOS) is the firmware that allows the computer to boot.
The basic input/output system for an IBM- based PC. It
BD- ROM standard DVD.
A Blu- ray disc player; this optical disc format holds more information than a
big data A newer term within data analytics that refers to large, unstructured databases
and the suite of tools needed to analyze and visualize that data. The objective is to find mean-
ingful patterns within the data that can be monetized.
binary notational system Also known as base 2, it uses only the values 0 (off) and 1 (on).
biometric devices Devices that authenticate users by scanning for one or more physical traits.
Some common types include fingerprint recognition, facial recognition, and retina scanning.
bit Short for binary digit, it is the smallest unit of data in computing, represented in the
binary notation system as a 1 (on) or a 0 (off).
bits per second (bps) A bit is a binary digit (a 1 or a 0). Bits per second (bps) is a measure
of throughput that measures how bits are communicated in one second.
Bluetooth pairing communication.
The process of connecting two Bluetooth- based devices together for
Blu- ray Disc (BD) An optical disc format that holds more information than a DVD or CD.
Blue Screen of Death (BSOD) Also called a STOP error, an error generated by Windows
when a fatal system error occurs. It features a blue screen with the word STOP followed by
an error message that can help in troubleshooting.
bookmarks by the user.
In a web browser, the list of frequently visited or favorite websites designated
Boolean data type A data type used in programming to designate true or false.
branching Programming logic that uses if and else if statements.
burner An optical drive so named because it employs a laser capable of intensities stronger
than what are used to read discs. It uses the laser to write, or burn, content to the disc.
bus A set of signal pathways that allows information and signals to travel between com-
ponents inside or outside a computer. A computer contains three types of buses: the external
bus, the address bus, and the data bus.
byte Eight bits of data is a byte.
C
cable lock Physical security device that attaches a laptop (or desktop) computer to sur-
rounding furniture, making it harder to steal.
Glossary 5
cable modem to the cable network.
A device that while not technically a modem creates an Internet connection
cable tester Device used to determine if a network cable is working properly.
cache In a web browser, the storage area for temporary Internet files.
cache memory A small, fast access storage area for frequently used data and instructions.
capacitive touchscreens ister contact, such as a human fingertip.
A touchscreen display that requires an electrical current to reg-
captive portal An open wireless network connection; when users access it, they get a
welcome page notifying them of the conditions of the network, including which behaviors
are permitted.
carcinogen An item that can cause increased risk of developing cancer.
casting Projecting a movie or music from one device to another display device, allowing
the casting device to be used for other purposes.
CD-­ ROM A compact disc (CD) player.
central processing unit (CPU) The main integrated circuit of a computer system, con-
sisting of an array of millions of integrated circuits, which interfaces with almost all other
components and runs application and system processes. Its purpose is to accept, perform cal-
culations on, and eject numeric data. It’s considered the “brain” of the computer because it’s
the part that performs the mathematical operations required for all other activity.
certificate In relation to websites, also called a security certificate or an SSL certificate.
Valid certificates allow websites to use the HTTPS protocol and identify them as legitimate
websites.
char A data type that consists of only one character.
chipset between the buses and components.
The set of controller chips that monitors and directs the traffic on the motherboard
Chrome OS Chrome web browser.
An operating system created by Google, based on a Linux kernel and the
Chromebook A netbook computer running Chrome OS.
Chromebox A desktop computer running Chrome OS.
CIA triad A security framework that outlines data confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
cipher text Encrypted text, as opposed to plain text that is easily readable.
clean uninstallation associated with that application.
Deleting a software application properly, including removing all files
client computers Computers that access servers for information.
6 Glossary
client/server network A group of computers connected together on the same network,
where some are designated as servers and others clients or workstations.
client software Software that connects to a server or database to retrieve information.
cloud backup data to the cloud.
Cloud backup or cloud storage refers to tools that allow you to save your
cloud computing net, to store files or run applications.
A method by which users access remote servers, typically over the Inter-
cloud storage service as opposed to on their local network.
Service that allows users to store data on servers across the Internet
CMOS battery unplugged.
A battery that provides power to the CMOS (or BIOS) chip that stores
CMOS settings. A PC must retain certain settings when it’s turned off and its power cord is
collaboration software Software designed to make it easy to work or communicate with
other people. Examples include email clients, conferencing, online workspace, and document-sharing
software.
command-­ line interface (CLI) be managed. Also called the console.
Text-­ based interface through which operating systems can
community cloud interests.
A cloud that is shared by several groups or companies with similar
compact disc (CD) An unwritable and inerasable compact disc permanently pressed with
digital data. A digital optical disc medium commonly capable of holding from 650 MB to
700 MB of data, corresponding to 74 to 80 minutes of CD-­ quality audio, which is of higher
quality than MP3 files.
compiled programming language compiler to translate it into machine code.
A programming language that requires the use of a
compiler format for execution.
An app that reads source code, analyzes it, and translates it into the proper
complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) tings when the PC is turned off or unplugged. Contains the system BIOS.
A chip used to retain system set-
complex instruction set computing (CISC) A CPU architecture that minimizes the
number of instructions per program, employed by Intel and Intel clones. It’s the opposite of
reduced instruction set computing (RISC).
compression Shrinking the size of a file when storing it on a hard drive or other media.
conferencing software face
virtual meeting over the Internet.
A software application that allows for people to have a face-­ to-
Glossary 7
connection delay receiving a response.
The amount of delay between sending a network data request and
console Text-­ based interface through which operating systems can be managed. Also called
the command line or Command Prompt.
constant A data type that does not change and is fixed, as opposed to a variable.
constraints the database.
Limitations put on a system. In a database, constraints can be used to limit the
type of data entered into a field. This can increase the reliability and accuracy of the data in
containers In programming, they allow multiple values of similar types to be grouped
together and accessed at the same time. Arrays and vectors are containers.
contingency plan Plan of action to take in the event of a system failure or data breach.
cookie uniquely identify the user.
A plain-­ text file downloaded from a website to a computer that can be used to
cookie consent from the end user.
Before a website can download a cookie onto a device, it must get consent
cookies uniquely identify the user.
Plain-­ text files downloaded from a website to a computer that can be used to
crash The failure of a software application to respond.
crimper A tool used to fasten RJ45 connectors onto the end of copper twisted-­ pair cabling.
critical data company monetizes.
Data that is necessary for a company’s survival, and likely the data the
D
data analytics monetized.
The process of studying data to identify patterns that could possibly be
data at rest moved from one location to another.
Data that is stored in a location, such as a hard drive, and that is not being
data availability Data is available to all users at any time of day and regardless of location.
data correlation Analytical process of trying to identify meaningful patterns between two
data points. For example, if two data points generally increase (or decrease) together at the
same time, they are positively correlated. If one goes up and another goes down, they are neg-
atively correlated.
data in transit server to a client computer.
Data that is being moved from one location to another, such as from a web
8 Glossary
data monetization Using data as an asset to make money.
data persistence Data is available even if the device loses power. For example, hard drives
exhibit data persistence, whereas RAM does not.
database dump An export of all data within a database.
database management system (DBMS) such as SQL.
The software that manages a database,
decimal notational system numerals 0 through 9.
Also known as base 10, it’s the numbering system that uses the
dedicated server A server that performs only server functions.
default gateway not on the local segment.
The router to which all packets are sent when the destination computer is
default search engine The service used to search the Internet, set up automatically in the
web browser. Examples include Google and Bing.
denial of service (DoS) unable to respond to legitimate requests.
An exploit where the attackers flood a server or system, making it
Department of Defense (DoD) model A four-­ layer networking model on which the basis
for the TCP/IP protocol suite was developed. Also known as the TCP/IP model.
device driver Also called a driver.
Software that allows a device to communicate with the operating system.
device hardening number of vulnerabilities.
Tasks a user completes to help protect a computer by reducing its
digital subscriber line (DSL) speed
Internet.
A technology that uses regular telephone lines to carry high-digital video disc (DVD) An unwritable and inerasable digital video disc permanently
pressed with digital data. A digital optical disc medium commonly capable of holding from
4.7 GB to 8.5 GB of data per side, corresponding to two to four hours of uncompressed
DVD-­ quality video.
Digital Visual Interface (DVI) A digital video interface standard that includes support for
analog monitor interfaces in the DVI-­ A standard or one or two links of digital transmission
in the DVI-­ D standard. There is also a DVI-­ I (the I stands for integrated) that has the ability
to support both standards.
disaster recovery The plan to restore access to systems and data after a disaster strikes.
discretionary access control An access control method where users have the ability to set
security permissions to the files and folders they own.
Glossary 9
DisplayPort A digital video interface standard created in 2008 by the Video Electronics
Standards Association (VESA); it was designed to be an industry standard and replace VGA
and DVI. It’s also backward compatible with VGA and DVI by using adapters.
distribution A version of Linux, which is a combination of the Linux kernel, a shell, shell
utilities, a desktop environment, and desktop utilities.
document database A database where each record and its associated data is considered a
document.
Domain Name System (DNS) addresses.
Service installed on a server that resolves host names to IP
driver a device driver.
Software that allows a device to communicate with the operating system. Also called
dual inline memory module (DIMM) A memory module packaging style that features a
circuit board with independent pins on both sides of the module’s card edge.
dumpster diving information.
Going through the garbage to obtain confidential or sensitive
DVD-­ ROM A DVD player.
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) TCP/IP configuration information to clients.
Service on a router or server that assigns
dynamic memory cally refreshed.
A type of memory that loses its data rapidly if it isn’t constantly electri-
E
eavesdropping are not supposed to hear.
An attack on security when the attacker listens in on conversations they
electromagnetic interference (EMI) The interference that can occur during transmissions
over copper cable due to electromagnetic energy outside the cable. The result is degradation
of the signal.
embedded operating system cally only being responsible for a single task.
An operating system designed to be small and efficient, typi-
encryption the file contents.
Converting files so that their content is scrambled if someone tries to browse
end-­ user license agreement (EULA) use limitations of software.
The agreement the user acknowledges outlining the
e-­ reader A mobile device designed for reading books, newspapers, magazines, and other
periodicals. Uses electrophoretic ink (E Ink).
10 Glossary
Ethernet connector Another name for an RJ45 twisted pair connector.
executables File types that open an application.
expansion slot One of the arbitrary insertion points in an expansion bus, based on a
specific technology— PCIe, for example.
extension The end of the filename that starts with a period. Examples are .doc , .exe ,
.docx , .xls , .xlsx , and .tiff . Also called a file extension.
external flash drive A small, portable nonvolatile storage device (basically a miniature hard
drive) that is located outside the computer case. Usually connects to the computer via a USB port.
external hard drive puter case.
A hard drive (either HDD or SSD) that is located outside the com-
External Serial ATA (eSATA) A now obsolete external interface for the attachment of
SATA devices that requires a shielded cable and different connector from the one used with
an internal SATA attachment.
F
fault tolerance tional computer.
The ability to suffer the loss of a component and yet still have an opera-
fiber- optic A type of cable consisting of thin flexible glass fiber surrounded by a rubberized
outer coating. Uses an ST, SC, or LC connector.
Fiber- to- the- Home (FTTH) Fiber- optic broadband service delivered directly to a residence.
fields The term used in databases to refer to columns of data.
field-replaceable unit (FRU) end user.
A computer part that is replaceable by a field technician or
file A collection of data that has its own name.
file backup than that of the original data.
A copy of user data, either one or more files or folders, in a different location
file extension The end of the filename that starts with a period. Examples are .doc ,
.docx , .xls , .xlsx , .exe , and .tiff . Also called an extension.
file server A server used to hold user files.
file system The organizational scheme that governs how files are stored and retrieved from
a disk. Examples include FAT, NTFS, APFS, and ext4.
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) file transfers. It uses ports 20 and 21.
A protocol in the TCP/IP protocol suite that is optimized for
Glossary 11
firewall A form of protection that can be either a stand-­ alone system or included in other
devices, such as routers or servers. You can find firewall solutions that are marketed as
hardware-­ only and others that are software-­ only. Either way, their role is to limit the traffic
in (or out) of the network.
firmware The name given to any software that is encoded in hardware, usually a read-­ only
memory (ROM) chip, and can be run without extra instructions from the operating system.
first-­ party cookie A small text file (cookie) downloaded from a website that contains
information regarding a user on a specific website. Can be used to remember usernames as
well as site preferences.
flash drive similar to writable floppy disks.
A small, portable USB storage device made of nonvolatile solid-­ state memory,
flashing the BIOS The act of changing the system firmware in a computer, often for the
purpose of upgrading to a higher version to support new hardware that the older version
does not support.
flat file The name given to a data file that has only two dimensions, such as a worksheet.
floats In programming, a data type that allows for numbers with a decimal place.
flowchart A visual depiction of a process or workflow.
foreign key One or more columns in a table that refer to the primary key in another table.
form factor The size and shape of a component. For example, AT and ATX are two form
factors for motherboards, and M.2 and 2.5″ are SSD form factors.
forms in tables.
Objects within a database that allow for the easy input and modification of data
freeware Software that is provided free of use from the developer.
front-­ side bus (FSB) The high-­ speed bus controlled by the Northbridge on which RAM,
cache (in the absence of the backside bus [BSB]), PCIe slots, AGP slots, and other local-­ bus
components are interconnected with the CPU and, in some cases, each other.
function (Fn) key Key marked with the letters Fn that produces particular functions when
pressed and held while pressing a key marked with an alternate function.
functions Sections of reusable code.
G
gaming console Computing device used specifically for playing computer games, but it
can also be used to watch videos or connect to the Internet.
12 Glossary
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) including personally identifiable information (PII).
European Union law protecting user data,
generative AI puter code.
Artificial intelligence that can create content such as text, images, or com-
gesture-­ based interaction phone movements.
Using a mobile device through a series of finger gestures and
gigabits per second (Gbps) A throughput unit representing one billion bits per second.
gigabyte (GB) One billion bytes of data.
gigahertz (GHz) per second.
A hertz is one electronic cycle per second. A gigahertz is one billion cycles
Google Play Store The Google app store where you find apps, games, movies, and music.
graphical user interface (GUI) An interface that users use to interact with the computer; it
contains pictures instead of just text and can be navigated with a mouse.
graphics processing unit (GPU) A processor, much like a central processing unit (CPU)
for the computer, located on a video card and specifically designed for video.
guest operating system An operating system, such as Windows, macOS, or Linux, that
resides and works within a virtual machine.
H
hacking puter system or its data.
A variety of computer crimes that involve gaining unauthorized access to a com-
hard disk drive (HDD) A nonvolatile disk drive that contains magnetically coated platters
in a sealed case and is often used as the main secondary-­ storage medium.
hard drives See hard disk drive (HDD).
hardware failure board, stops working.
When a piece of hardware, such as a motherboard, hard drive, or key-
headset communication.
A peripheral device with speakers and a microphone that allows for two-­ way
heat sink A block of aluminum or other metal, with veins throughout or fins, that sits on
top of a heat-­ producing component, drawing its heat away.
hexadecimal notational system through 9 and the letters A through F.
A base 16 notational system, which uses the numerals 0
High-­ Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI) A digital video interface standard intro-
duced in 2002, which is commonly used by computers as well as television sets.
Glossary 13
home assistants Voice-­ controlled devices that allow for the management of IoT devices as
well as perform tasks such as setting reminders, providing notifications, and playing music.
host Any computer or device on a TCP/IP network that has an IP address. In virtualization,
the machine that is providing resources to the virtual machines.
hybrid cloud that owns it and on the Internet.
A cloud that has components in two places: on-­ premises for the company
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) A standardized markup language for the transfer
and rendering of web pages with their associated elements.
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) An insecure protocol in the TCP/IP protocol suite
that is used for communication between a web server and a web browser and is optimized
for Internet content such as text, pictures, videos, and hyperlinks. It uses port 80.
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS) A combination of HTTP with Secure
Sockets Layer (SSL) to create a secure connection. It uses port 443 by default.
hypervisor Software that allows multiple operating systems to share the same host, and it
also manages the physical resource allocation to those virtual OSs.
I
identifiers In programming, names assigned to a program element. Identifier types include
variables (which can change) and constants (which are static).
impersonation Pretending to be someone or something that you are not. A tactic used to
gain unauthorized access to systems or files.
infrared (IR) light waves.
A short-­ distance wireless communications standard that uses nonvisible
infrastructure as a service (IaaS) hardware) as the solution.
Cloud service level that provides infrastructure (virtual
ink cartridge A reservoir of ink and a printhead in a removable package.
inkjet printers A type of sprayed-­ ink printer. Sometimes called a bubble-­ jet.
inoculating The process of running an antivirus program on a computer.
instant messaging to another.
Software that allows a text message or image to be sent from one user
integer In programming, a data type that specifies a whole number (one without decimals).
integrated development environment (IDE) that contains a code editor, compiler, and debugger all in one.
A software package for software developers
14 Glossary
Integrated Drive Electronics (IDE) A nickname for the original ATA standard, now known
as parallel ATA (PATA) since the advent of serial ATA (SATA).
integrity In a security framework, it ensures that the data is true and correct.
interference When unintended wireless signals conflict with the intended ones, causing dis-
ruption in communications or communication speed.
Internet of Things (IoT) other and exchange data.
The global network of devices able to communicate with each
Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) email and uses port 143.
A protocol in the TCP/IP suite that receives
Internet Protocol (IP) security cameras Protocol (IP) configuration information.
Security devices, part of the IoT, that use Internet
Internet service provider (ISP) A company that provides access to the Internet.
interpreted programming language A programming language in which each line of code
is read by an interpreter every time the program is executed.
iOS Mobile operating system developed by Apple and used in iPhones.
IP address A numerical designation that uniquely identifies a device on a network.
iTunes app store The Apple app store, where you find apps, games, movies, and music.
J
journaling A file system feature by which file changes are also written to a special file
called a journal. Journaling results in a more fault-­ resistant file system.
K
keyboard with the characters that they represent.
keylogger remote user.
key-value database kilobits per second (Kbps) per second.
The most common computer input device for entering text with buttons labeled
Malware that records all keystrokes and sends the information to a file or a
A database where data is represented as a collection of key-value pairs.
A throughput unit of measure representing one thousand bits
Glossary 15
kilobyte (KB) kinetics One thousand bytes of data.
A sense of motion. Mobile devices often have kinetic sensors to detect motion.
L
L1 cache which it ’ s dedicated.
Cache memory that is smallest and the fastest and closest to the processor core to
L2 cache Cache memory that is larger and slower than L1 cache and not as close to the
processor. It ’ s usually, but not always, dedicated to one processor core.
L3 cache tiple cores within a processor.
The largest and slowest cache memory bank, which is often shared between mul-
laser printer An output device that uses a laser, a drum, and powdered toner to create
printed images on paper or other materials.
latency The amount of delay between sending a network data request and receiving a response.
least privilege model The security principle by which users should be granted access only
to the resources they need and nothing more.
legacy browsers Internet browsers that are not the most up- to- date version.
license agreement manufacturer of the software.
The right to use the application in a limited way as prescribed by the
light- emitting diode (LED) monitor An LCD monitor that uses light- emitting diodes
(LEDs) instead of fluorescent bulbs as a backlight.
Lightning A proprietary connector developed by Apple and used on iPhones and iPads.
Linux An open source operating system kernel developed by Linus Torvalds in 1991.
liquid cooling A cooling method used to keep CPUs and other hot- running components
from overheating by pumping a liquid from outside the system through tubing that leads to
blocks that mount to the components like heat sinks.
liquid crystal display (LCD) monitor A video display unit that uses a liquid crystal display
(LCD) panel to form the pixels corresponding to the image to be displayed.
local area network (LAN) Groups of computers and associated peripherals connected
by a communications channel and capable of sharing files and other resources among sev-
eral users.
logical schema For a database, it ’ s the layout of the tables and connections.
looping In programming, it ’ s logic that uses the while command.
16 Glossary
M
macOS Operating system created by Apple and used on its laptop and desktop computers.
macros Programs developed within databases or spreadsheets to execute specific tasks.
malware exploits, and worms.
A broad term used for many attacks on computer systems, such as viruses,
mandatory access control The most restrictive access control method, which stipulates
that all objects on the computer or network will have their security managed by a system
administrator, including any files that a user may create on the system.
markup language A programming language used for formatting and presentation.
An example is the Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), which is used extensively in
web pages.
meaningful reporting audience.
The process of translating data into insights and action for an
Media Access Control (MAC) Hardware address built into all network cards.
megabits per second (Mbps) per second.
A throughput unit of measure representing one million bits
megabyte (MB) One million bytes of data.
megahertz (MHz) cycles per second.
A hertz is one electronic cycle per second. A megahertz is one million
memory be accessed quickly.
A small, temporary storage space used by the computer to hold data that needs to
memory bus central processing unit (CPU).
The electrical path on a motherboard between the memory (RAM) and the
memory card A small portable storage device made of nonvolatile solid-­ state memory;
commonly used in digital cameras and mobile gaming devices.
metadata In nonrelational databases, metadata is text data that describes objects, such as
words used to describe a picture in order to make it searchable.
methods In programming, methods are reusable object code.
mirroring one display are shown on the other.
Showing the exact same image on two display devices. All actions performed on
mobile hotspot Using a smartphone or other cellular-­ enabled device to allow other com-
puters to connect to the Internet through it.
Glossary 17
modem A device used to provide Internet access through the analog phone line. At the
source, it takes a digital signal and converts (modulates) it to analog and then from analog
back to digital (demodulates) at the destination device.
modules In databases, modules let the administrator automate tasks, much like a macro would.
monitor Another name for a display, or an output device that shows video images.
motherboard attached.
A circuit board to which all computer components are directly or indirectly
mouse A common input device that uses one of various tracking mechanisms to detect its
movement over a surface by the user’s hand.
multifactor authentication (MFA) Requiring multiple pieces of information for a user to
log in. Generally speaking, in addition to a username, multifactor authentication requires
users to provide two or more pieces of information out of these four categories: something
the user knows, something the user has, something the user is, or somewhere the user is.
multifunctional printer or faxing.
A printer that has additional capabilities built in, such as scanning
multiple concurrent users base at one time.
In databases, allows multiple people to actively use the data-
N
near-­ field communication (NFC) A short-­ range communication technology that lets users
hold their phone next to someone else’s and transfer data or bump their phone to a receiver
at a store to pay for a purchase.
network-­ attached storage (NAS) Storage, such as hard drives, attached directly to a net-
work for the purpose of storing data for clients on the network, like a file server.
network interface card (NIC) In networking, the PC expansion board that plugs into a
personal computer or server and works with the network operating system to control the
flow of information over the network. The network interface card is connected to the net-
work cabling (twisted-­ pair, coaxial, or fiber-­ optic cable), which in turn connects to another
network card or central connectivity device.
noncritical data loss to the company or person.
Data, that if lost, is easily replaceable and may not result in catastrophic
nondedicated server A server that also is used as a workstation by a user.
nonrepudiation that an event happened.
A security mechanism in place to make it impossible for a user to deny
18 Glossary
nonstructured data In databases, data that is not text or numbers. Nonstructured data is
not easy to catalog or search because it does not have defined parameters.
nonvolatile memory Memory that does not lose its contents when the power is turned off,
such as hard disk drives (HDDs) and solid-­ state drives (SSDs).
nonvolatile memory express (NVMe) A solid-­ state drive (SSD) technology that greatly
improves the data transfer rates over previous standards.
O
objects ried or called upon to perform a task.
In programming, collections of attributes, properties, and methods that can be que-
octal notational system A base 8 notational system, which uses the numerals 0 through 7.
octet A group of 8 bits.
offline storage server or in the cloud.
In databases, it refers to data stored on a local PC rather than stored on a
online storage In databases, it refers to a database stored in the cloud.
online workspace Internet.
Software that allows users to edit the same file at the same time over the
on-­ path attack An attack where the attacker secretly places something (such as a piece of
software or a rogue router) between a server and the client, and neither party is aware of it.
The on-­ path software intercepts data and then sends the information back and forth as if
nothing is wrong.
on-­ premises cloud clients.
A cloud that is local to one company and not shared among other
open source be modified by any user.
A name given to the type of computer code that is shared freely and that can
operating system (OS) Software designed to provide an interface between the computer
hardware and the user, coordinate hardware components, provide an environment for soft-
ware to run, display file and directory structure, and monitor system health.
optical drive and CD-­ ROM.
A device used to read an optical disc. Examples are BD-­ ROM, DVD-­ ROM,
original equipment manufacturer (OEM) website software program. Legitimate site to download the software from.
Website owned by the developer of a
Glossary 19
P
Parallel Advanced Technology Attachment (PATA) hard drive standard, since the invention of Serial ATA (SATA).
The newer name for the original IDE
parallel port A legacy port and cable-­ connector pairing based on a DB25 interface most
commonly used for attaching a printer to a computer.
partition Logical division of hard drive space.
password cracking access to a computer system.
Attempts made to guess passwords in an effort to gain unauthorized
password expiration of time.
Policy that states a password will expire after a certain period
password manager various systems or websites.
Software application that securely manages multiple passwords across
patching Downloading and installing new updates to software.
PCI Express (PCIe) A high-­ performance serial local-­ bus slot architecture that obviates the
need for AGP and PCI slots. PCIe supports combining the resources of multiple adapters for
higher performance.
peer-­ to-­ peer network a network with no server.
A group of computers, all considered equals, connected together on
Peripheral Component Interconnect (PCI) A popular expansion slot architecture invented
by Intel that succeeded the ISA slot and that is succeeded by PCIe.
permissions on a file or folder.
Also known as security settings, they define what actions a user can perform
perpetual license Software license that allows the user to use the application indefinitely.
personal computer (PC) laptop or desktop.
A computing device intended for home or personal use, such as a
personal health information (PHI) Information that relates to an individual’s health, such
as blood pressure, medical history, and prescription information.
personally identifiable information (PII) Anything that can be used to identify an
individual person on its own or in context with other information.
petabyte (PB) One quadrillion bytes of data.
20 Glossary
phishing A form of social engineering in which you simply ask someone for a piece of
information you are missing by making it look as if it is a legitimate request. Commonly sent
via email. Any electronic activity designed to defraud someone.
physical schema the database management software.
The layout of a database, specifically the actual tables that are created in
piconet seven other devices in one piconet.
A Bluetooth network. A Bluetooth-­ enabled device can communicate with up to
plain old telephone service (POTS) Standard telephone service, as opposed to other con-
nection technologies like a Digital Subscriber Line (DSL).
plain text being encrypted like cipher text.
Data in transit or at rest that is stored in easily readable text, as opposed to
platform as a service (PaaS) grammer development tools to clients.
Cloud service that provides infrastructure as well as pro-
plug-­ and-­ play A Windows feature; when a new hardware device is installed, Windows will
automatically install the driver (if available) and configure the device for immediate use.
point stick A laptop pointing device built into the middle of the keyboard.
pointing device trol the cursor on a screen.
An input device, such as a mouse or touchpad, that allows a user to con-
pop-­ up An extra, usually small browser window that appears automatically when users
display a certain web page or click a certain button on a page.
pop-­ up blocker appearing.
Software built into a web browser that prevents pop-­ up windows from
port In hardware terms, the physical location where a cable plugs in. In TCP/IP terms, the
channel over which the Process/Application layer protocol communicates.
POST card A circuit board you insert into an open slot in the motherboard or a USB port
that displays a two-­ digit numeric code on its LED to tell you where the system is in the boot-
ing process.
Post Office Protocol 3 (POP3) port 110.
A protocol in the TCP/IP suite that receives email and uses
power button In today’s computers, a physical switch that can be configured to perform
multiple functions, such as power the computer on/off and put it into sleep mode, based on
the length of time it is held.
power-­ on self-­ test (POST) Part of the boot process controlled by the BIOS that verifies
the working condition of the hardware the BIOS knows about and hands off the boot pro-
cess to the boot device.
Glossary 21
power outage unplanned.
When the electricity supply to a computer is cut off; usually this is
power supply unit (PSU) power supply.
The device in a computer that provides the power, also called a
predictive AI based on past behavior.
Artificial intelligence that is capable of projecting future actions or behaviors,
preshared key (PSK) router use the same security passphrase.
A security standard where all clients connecting to the server or
primary key uniquely.
In a database table, one or more fields whose data is used to identify a record
print server can send print jobs.
A server computer that has printers logically installed on it to which clients
printed circuit board (PCB) An electronic circuit board used in computers that has connec-
tivity paths integrated for component communication.
printer puter onto paper.
An electromechanical output device that is used to put information from the com-
privacy authorized to do so.
In data security, keeping data from being seen or accessed by someone who is not
privacy screen screen filter.
A cover over a monitor screen that directs light from it at a restricted angle
so that anyone who isn’t viewing it straight on won’t be able to read it clearly. Also called a
private browsing Also known as incognito mode or private mode, a feature available in
most web browsers that allows users to browse the Internet without leaving any traces of
their online activity on their system or device.
private cloud A cloud that is local to one company and not shared among other clients.
process The name for a task running on a computer.
product key or use the application.
A unique code that comes with purchased software that allows you to install
productivity software Programs that help you get your work done faster, such as spread-
sheets, word processing, email, or presentation software, and visual diagramming.
profile synchronization Linking a user’s profile, in the web browser, to an email account.
The user can log in from any device and access the same profile settings.
projector interfaces onto a screen.
An output device that uses a light source to display an image input to one of its
properties In programming, properties describe the characteristics of an object.
22 Glossary
proprietary software Apps developed by a company that retains the code and does not
allow it to be modified. Usually requires a software license to operate the software.
protocol In networking and communications, the specification that defines the proce-
dures to follow when transmitting and receiving data. Protocols define the format, timing,
sequence, and error-­ checking systems used.
protocol analyzer network traffic and analyze its contents.
A network administration tool that allows administrators to capture
PS/2 port A six-­ pin mini-­ DIN connector named after the second generation of IBM
personal computers and still occasionally seen today, trailing behind USB in popularity, for
mouse and keyboard attachment.
pseudocode Programming code that is written in human-­ readable format, such as com-
ments within code to help other programmers understand what the code does.
public cloud among companies.
A cloud that is accessed via the Internet, and whose resources may be shared
Q
queries query language data from a database.
Requests made to retrieve data, typically from a database.
The language, such as Structured Query Language (SQL), used to retrieve
R
radio frequency (RF) A form of short-­ distance wireless networking transmission.
radio frequency (RF) broadband Internet provided by cell phone providers.
Internet connection using cellular frequencies,
RAID Redundant Array of Independent (or Inexpensive) Disks. A form of fault tolerance in
all but one version that allows the loss of at least one drive without compromising data.
RAID 0 The only type of RAID that is not fault tolerant, RAID 0 provides striped volume
sets on two or more drives that allow for larger volumes than one drive alone can provide.
When one or more drives are lost, all data is compromised.
RAID 1 A fault-­ tolerant type of RAID that provides mirroring and duplexing. Two and only
two drives exist in a mirrored set. The loss of either drive does not compromise data.
RAID 5 A fault-­ tolerant type of RAID that combines striped sets with distributed parity
across all drives in the set. A minimum of three drives is required, and the loss of any one
drive does not compromise data.
Glossary 23
random access memory (RAM) A temporary, volatile storage area used by the computer
to access data quickly. Data in RAM is lost when the computer loses power.
ransomware ware removed from the system.
Malware that attempts to get the infected user to pay money to have the mal-
read-­ only memory (ROM) written to.
Memory in the computer that can only be read but not
rebooting Physically turning the computer off and then turning it back on.
record A row of unique data within a database.
reduced instruction set computing (RISC) A CPU architecture that minimizes the cycles
per instruction. It’s the opposite of complex instruction set computing (CISC). RISC chips
can be made smaller and produce less heat, and so they are more suited for smaller mobile
devices.
redundancy A duplicate system or data set for use in case of hardware failure or data loss.
refresh rate hertz (Hz).
On a display, how fast the screen is redrawn every second. Measured in
registered jack 11 (RJ11) an RJ11 connector.
A connector type for twisted-­ pair cabling. Telephone cabling uses
registered jack 45 (RJ45) A connector type for copper twisted-­ pair cabling.
registering Providing your name and contact information to the software manufacturer.
relational database (records) and columns (fields).
A software program that stores data in tables, organizing it into rows
relational database management system (RDBMS) a relational database.
The software program that manages
remote support Software that allows a technician or other support staff to connect
remotely to a computer over the Internet, making it easier to troubleshoot and fix problems.
replay attack the intent of using it later.
A type of attack where the attacker captures information from a sender with
replication A full working copy of the data, computer, or network.
reports In a database, reports are queries that have been saved to be run later and are usu-
ally formatted to produce a professional look rather than showing just raw data.
reseating and reconnecting the chip or cable.
Opening the case and pressing down on each socketed chip, or disconnecting
resistive touchscreens that from a stylus or a fingernail.
A touchscreen that requires pressure to register a contact, such as
24 Glossary
resolution The number of rows and columns that a display unit is capable of representing.
restore point A backup copy of the important system configuration files created once a
day (by default) by the System Restore utility.
reverse engineering Deconstructing code so you can understand its intent and purpose.
role-­ based access control Security model where user accounts are assigned to roles to
determine what they can access. Permissions are granted to roles only, not individual user
accounts.
rootkits Software programs that have the ability to obtain root-­ level (administrative)
access and hide certain things from the operating system.
router addresses.
A networking device that separates networks and directs traffic based on logical IP
rule-­ based access control Security model where permissions are determined based on
rules that are established in an access control list (ACL).
S
Safe Mode A low-­ functionality troubleshooting mode that bypasses all optional com-
ponents, both hardware and software, loading only the minimum required to display the
desktop.
satellite Internet A type of Internet connection that uses a satellite dish to receive data
from a satellite and a relay station that is connected to the Internet.
scalability The ability to have very small or very large access, or any size in between. Data-
base servers such as Microsoft SQL and Oracle are extremely scalable, allowing access to
hundreds or tens of thousands of users at a time. Enterprise versions of database software
also allow databases to stretch between on-­ site servers and the cloud, with the most recent
data being available on-­ site.
schema queries, and data types allowed.
The rules and structure of the database. It defines the tables, forms, reports,
screened subnet servers.
A semi-­ public network segment located between a perimeter router
and an internal router on your network. Used for web servers, FTP servers, and email relay
scripting languages A programming language designed to create simple programs that
execute a list of tasks or get data from a dataset.
secure digital (SD) card cameras.
A standard of small memory card commonly used in digital
Glossary 25
semi-­ structured data easier to catalog and search.
Unstructured data that has been tagged with metadata, making it
sequence single task.
In flow charting, a sequence describes multiple steps needed to accomplish a
Serial Advanced Technology Attachment (SATA) The latest version of the standard that
specifies IDE (PATA) but that uses only a single serial pathway for communication instead of
multiple parallel pathways as PATA uses.
serial number sion number.
Identifier of a piece of software, usually indicating the program and ver-
serial port connector.
A computer interface that transmits one bit at a time, also known as an RS-­ 232
servers Computer with the responsibility of fulfilling requests from client computers.
service A function provided by a server to client computers.
service outage computers.
When a server is unable to provide specific functionality to client
service set identifier (SSID) The unique name of a wireless network that differentiates it
from other wireless networks that are also in range of a wireless client.
shareware Software distributed free of charge for a limited number of uses; then, if the
user wants to continue using it, they must purchase it.
shell The command interface of an operating system.
shortcut A small file used as a pointer to the target file’s real location.
shoulder surfing sensitive data.
Watching someone when they enter their username, password, or other
signature In computer security, a trait or characteristic of a virus used to identify the virus.
It can also mean a person’s physical or digital signing of a document, used for nonrepudia-
tion purposes.
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) email and that uses port 25.
A protocol in the TCP/IP suite designed to send
single-­ factor authentication (such as a password) to log into a system.
When users are required to enter in only one security factor
single sign-­ on (SSO) An authentication system that gives users access to all of the applica-
tions and systems they need with one initial login when they log on.
small form-­ factor pluggable (SFP) work cable.
A connector used at the end of a fiber-­ optic net-
26 Glossary
small outline DIMM (SODIMM) A small form-­ factor memory module based on dual inline
memory module (DIMM) principles and designed for the mobile computing sector.
smart TV A television that has built-­ in Internet and apps.
smartphone touchscreen and Internet access.
A mobile telephone device closely resembling a small computer, usually with a
snooping them for useful information.
An attack where a protocol analyzer is used to capture data packets and examine
social engineering An attack in which people are deceived or manipulated into revealing
information the attacker can use to access data they shouldn’t access.
software as a service (SaaS) Cloud service level that provides infrastructure, programmer
development tools, and software applications to clients.
software piracy The illegal copying and distribution of software.
solid-­ state drive (SSD) A nonvolatile storage device that has no moving parts but uses
flash memory to emulate a conventional hard disk drive.
sound card An adapter or component that provides audio output from a device.
source code ming language.
The original programming code written for a program, in its native program-
spam Unwanted junk email or unsolicited email or texts.
speaker Computer peripheral that produces sound.
spoofing users’ information.
Creating a website that masquerades as a legitimate secure site but actually steals
spyware Software that records your computer usage. A keylogger is one example.
SSL certificate identifies them as legitimate websites.
Security certificate that allows websites to use the HTTPS protocol and
static memory Memory that does not change, nor is it lost when the computer loses power
(as opposed to dynamic memory, which is lost when the computer loses power).
STOP error Also called a Blue Screen of Death, an error generated by Windows when a
fatal system error occurs. It features a blue screen with the word STOP followed by an error
message that can help in troubleshooting.
string sentence.
In programming, a data type that specifies multiple characters, such as a word or a
strong password and unusual.
A password that is difficult for someone to guess; usually is long, varied,
Glossary 27
structured data and columns.
Information that is stored in tables in a relational database, using rows
subnet mask The value used to determine the subnet on which a host resides.
subscriber identity module (SIM) cellular network the device can participate in.
Microchip included in mobile devices that identifies the
subscription of time.
Software license that allows the user to use it for a specific, limited amount
switch workstations, servers, and printers.
A network connectivity device used to connect multiple devices together, such as
system backup Backing up files on a hard drive that includes operating system files, which
can be used to restore the entire system in the case of failure.
system board Another name for a motherboard.
System Configuration utility Also known by its executable filename of MSCONFIG, it’s a
utility that allows Windows users to disable certain applications and services selectively that
automatically load at startup.
system image A backup of all files on a hard drive, including user data and operating
system files, which can be used to restore the entire system in the case of failure.
system restore The Windows utility that automatically (or manually) creates restore points.
T
table The name of a set of rows/records and fields/columns in a database.
tablet A small, portable computing device larger than a smartphone but generally smaller
than a laptop. It does not have a built-­ in hardware keyboard.
telepresence communicating.
A term associated with video teleconferencing. The goal of telepresence
is to make it feel like people in different offices are actually sitting in the same office and
Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP) dynamic, 128-­ bit per-­ packet security key.
Wireless security standard that generates a
terabits per second (Tbps) per second.
A throughput unit of measure representing one trillion bits
terabyte (TB) One trillion bytes of data.
teraflop per second.
The measure of speed for video cards, in trillions of floating point operations
28 Glossary
third- party cookie A text file downloaded from a website that tracks the user ’ s identity
across websites. Commonly used by digital advertisers to customize ads based on observed
user preferences.
third- party website A website that offers software downloads but that is not owned by
the original developer of the software. The software on third- party websites might or might
not be exactly like the original and could contain unwanted add- ons.
Thunderbolt external storage, and other devices.
A high- speed digital computer interface developed by Apple for video,
toner printers as opposed to ink.
A black, carbon substance mixed with polyester resins and iron oxide, used by laser
touchpad A pointing device commonly built into laptop computers that allows you to use
your finger to move the cursor on the screen and click, as you would do with a mouse.
touchscreen A type of display unit that uses capacitive or resistive touch as an input mech-
anism without requiring separate input methods.
trackball An exposed ball that functions much like an inverted mouse.
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) suite A set of computer-
to- computer communication protocols that encompasses media access, packet transport,
session communications, file transfer, email, and terminal emulation. TCP/IP is supported by
a very large number of hardware and software vendors and is available on many different
computers from PCs to mainframes.
Trojan horse something malicious.
A rogue application that appears to do something useful but also does
U
unauthorized information alteration improperly modifies data without permission.
A threat to data integrity; it ’ s when someone
Unicode and several character sets.
A superset of ASCII that supports 136,755 characters across 139 language scripts
uniform resource locator (URL) something like www.google.com .
The address of a website typed into a web browser,
uninterruptible power supply (UPS) A UPS is designed to protect everything that ’ s
plugged into it from power surges, power sags, and even power outages. The device contains
one or more batteries and fuses. Energy is stored in the batteries, and if the power fails, the
batteries can power the computer for a period of time so that the administrator can safely
power it down.
Glossary 29
Universal Serial Bus (USB) connecting external peripherals to a PC.
A high-­ speed, hot-­ pluggable serial interface used for
unshielded twisted pair (UTP) wire and a flexible outer coating.
Networking cable that has four twisted pairs of copper
USB lock Physical security device that blocks access to USB ports on a computer.
user account unique username and password.
The security mechanism that allows people to log into a computer with a
utility software Programs that provide useful features to supplement your operating
system, such as antimalware protection, diagnostic and maintenance, or file compression.
V
variable In programming, a data identifier for a value that can change.
vector dynamically sized.
In programming, a container that can store data of multiple types and that can be
video card projectors.
An adapter or component that provides the GPU, its memory, and an interface
to connect to an output device, usually a video display unit, which includes monitors and
video doorbell usual doorbell-­ ringing duties.
A device at a door that has a security camera attached to it as well as the
Video Graphics Array (VGA) video connector in the computer industry.
An analog video connector that was the first standardized
virtual machine (VM) A virtualized version of a computer.
virtual private network (VPN) A secured, encrypted connection between two specific
computers that occurs through a public network such as the Internet. It works by creating a
virtual, private tunnel by encapsulating the traveling data into secure packets.
virtual reality (VR) The computer-­ generated simulation of three-­ dimensional images that
can be interacted with by a user. Requires a VR headset to function.
virus the file runs.
Malware that attaches itself to an executable file and modifies what happens when
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) ferencing to be transmitted over network cables.
Technology that allows audio calls or video telecon-
volatile memory volatile memory.
Memory that loses its content if power is lost. RAM is a great example of
30 Glossary
VR headset a user to experience virtual reality.
Specialized hardware device that includes a display and speakers, which allows
vulnerability (1) A flaw in the programming of an application that creates the potential for
misuse; (2) a tool or technique that allows an attacker to exploit that vulnerability.
W
weak passwords A password that is easy for someone to guess.
wearable device tionality to a user.
Watches, headsets, glasses, and other computer devices that provide func-
web camera A video-­ only camera that connects to a computer so that the video it captures
can be sent across the Internet in real time or recorded by software.
web server Server that specializes in hosting and delivering Internet pages to web clients.
wide area network (WAN) boundaries.
Network that crosses local, regional, and/or international
Wi-­ Fi Protected Access (WPA) An enhancement of 802.11 encryption that secures Wi-­ Fi
communications. The most current and secure standard is WPA3.
Wi-­ Fi Protected Access 2 (WPA2) able for 802.11 networks.
An updated, strong wireless encryption method avail-
Wi-­ Fi Protected Access 3 (WPA3) method available for 802.11 networks.
The most updated, strongest wireless encryption
Windows Operating system family developed by Microsoft.
Windows Recovery Environment (WinRE) Troubleshooting utility that comes with Win-
dows Vista and newer, which allows a user to boot to the Windows installation USB flash
drive and repair a corrupted Windows installation.
Windows Registry settings.
Database in the Windows operating system that contains all system
Windows Update operating system.
A Windows utility that provides for automatic updates of the Windows
Wired Equivalency Protocol (WEP) An old security protocol for 802.11 (wireless) net-
works that attempts to establish the same security as would be present in a wired network. It
has security flaws and is easily compromised.
wireless access point A network connectivity device that allows other devices to connect
to a network without physical network cables.
Glossary 31
wireless local area network (WLAN) A network using the 802.11 standard, or Wi-­ Fi.
wireless personal area network (WPAN) Another name for Bluetooth networks.
wiretapping in on communications.
An attack method where the attacker intercepts a signal over a wire to listen
workstation A computer that users use to access resources, most often a client computer
on a network. Usually a desktop or laptop computer.
worm Trojan horse or a virus.
A self-­ transporting malware application that carries an active payload, such as a